Alert summaries and conditional actions (#3245)
elastic/security-docs: docs/detections/rules-ui-create.asciidoc

NOTE: To use {kib} Actions for alert notifications, you need the
https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions[appropriate license] and your role needs *All* privileges for the *Action and Connectors* feature. For more information, see <<case-permissions>>.

. Select a connector type, which determines how notifications are sent. For example, if you select the {jira} connector, notifications are sent to your {jira} system.
+
NOTE: Each action type requires a connector. Connectors store the
information required to send the notification from the external system. You can
configure connectors while creating the rule or on the {kib} Rules and Connectors
page (*Stack Management* -> *Rules and Connectors* -> *Connectors*). For more
information, see {kibana-ref}/action-types.html[Action and connector types].
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/available-action-types.png[Shows available connector types]

. After you select a connector, set its action frequency to define when notifications are sent:

> ** *Summary of alerts*: Some rule types support alert summaries. Select this option if want to reduce the number of notifications you receive without affecting their timeliness. Alert notifications that summarize the new, ongoing, and recovered alerts will be sent at your preferred time intervals. 

Author: Thanks! Removed in [5578a18](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/3245/commits/5578a1885debfe87bd1d9ed46a2a91d0c2c78eaa).

NOTE: To use {kib} Actions for alert notifications, you need the
https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions[appropriate license] and your role needs *All* privileges for the *Action and Connectors* feature. For more information, see <<case-permissions>>.

> . Select a connector type, which determines how notifications are sent. For example, if you select the {jira} connector, notifications are sent to your {jira} system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select a connector type to determine how notifications are sent. For example, if you select the {jira} connector, notifications are sent to your {jira} system.
```
Just another option that jumped out at me, feel free to disregard

+
NOTE: Each action type requires a connector. Connectors store the
information required to send the notification from the external system. You can
configure connectors while creating the rule or on the {kib} Rules and Connectors
page (*Stack Management* -> *Rules and Connectors* -> *Connectors*). For more
information, see {kibana-ref}/action-types.html[Action and connector types].
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/available-action-types.png[Available connector types]

. After you select a connector, set its action frequency to define when notifications are sent:

> ** *Summary of alerts*: Select this option if you want to reduce the number of notifications you receive without affecting their timeliness. Alert notifications that summarize alerts will be sent at your preferred time intervals. 

Author: ```suggestion
** *Summary of alerts*: Select this option to get a report that summarizes generated alerts, which you can review at your convenience. Alert summaries will be sent at the specified time intervals. 
```

> ** *Summary of alerts*: Select this option if you want to reduce the number of notifications you receive without affecting their timeliness. Alert notifications that summarize alerts will be sent at your preferred time intervals. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** *Summary of alerts*: Select this option if you want to reduce the number of notifications you receive. Alert notifications that summarize alerts will be sent at your preferred time intervals. 
```
Is it accurate to say that it wouldn't affect their timeliness? I'm thinking not since as I understand it, this option would delay some of the alerts until your selected time interval.

Author: Thanks for flagging this :) Responded [here](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/3245#discussion_r1199802908).

+
NOTE: When setting a custom notification frequency, do not choose a time that is shorter than the rule's execution schedule. 

> ** *For each alert*: Select this option to ensure notifications are sent every time new alerts are generated.  

Author: This is a totally fair criticism. Would an image or gif and additional detail in the main step help illustrate the interactivity of the left drop-down menu? For example:

. After you select a connector, set its action frequency to define when notifications are sent. The following options are available in a drop-down menu that appears when you click the left field:

<image or gif>

> ** *For each alert*: Select this option to ensure notifications are sent every time new alerts are generated.  

Author: RE your feedback on the timeliness of alert summaries: 

You and @benironside make valid points (twinsies! 👯 ). I suppose one could argue that alert summaries would be timely if users scheduled them to closely mirror the rule execution schedule. That's a generous assumption though and I think the more valuable functionality being offered is that the alert summary feature allow users to review a single notification message at the time of their choosing. How about something like this:

- **Summary of alerts**: Select this option to get a report that summarizes generated alerts, which you can review at your convenience. Alert summaries will be sent at your preferred time intervals.

. (Optional) Specify additional conditions that need to be met for notifications to send. Click the toggle to enable a setting, then add the required details:

** *if alert matches query*: Enter a KQL query that defines field-value pairs or query conditions that must be met for notifications to send. The query only searches alert documents in the indices specified for the rule.

> ** *if alert is generated during timeframe*: Set timeframe details. Notifications are only sent if alerts are generated within the timeframe you define.

Reviewer 2: @XavierM Just wanted to make sure that `Notifications are only sent if alerts are generated within the timeframe you define.` formulated correctly. Does timeframe affects alerts timestamps or when action will be triggered. In other words, is it possible to send notification with the alerts generated outside of the timeframe?

Reviewer 3: the way it is described/written, it is the way it is working. It does NOT affect when the action will be triggered. It is all about when the alert has been generated/detected. For example if you had a timeframe filter on weekday during 9am to 5pm that  mean that if we detect alert during then we will send an action.

> ** *if alert is generated during timeframe*: Set timeframe details. Notifications are only sent if alerts are generated within the timeframe you define.

Author: No objections here. :)

> . Complete the required connector type fields ({jira} example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Complete the required connector type fields. Here is an example with {jira}:
```
The way you had it works but I think this way the words introducing the image seem more connected to the image

+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/selected-action-type.png[]

> .. Use the default notification message or customize it. You can add more context to the message by clicking the icon above the message text box and selecting from a list of available <<rule-action-variables, alert notification variables>>.

Reviewer 4: Kinda weird to have a single substep for a main step -- this should probably just be its own step.
```suggestion
. Use the default notification message or customize it. You can add more context to the message by clicking the icon above the message text box and selecting from a list of available <<rule-action-variables, alert notification variables>>.
```

[[rule-action-variables]]
==== Alert notification placeholders

You can use http://mustache.github.io/[mustache syntax] to add the following placeholders to <<rule-notifications, rule action>> fields. Different variables are provided based on the rule's action frequency. 

> If the rule’s action frequency is a summary of alerts, it passes the variables that summarize the new, ongoing, and recovered alerts. Refer to {kibana-ref}/rule-action-variables.html#alert-summary-action-variables[Action frequency: Summary of alerts] more information about summary of alert variables. 

Author: Thanks! Removed in [5578a18](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/3245/commits/5578a1885debfe87bd1d9ed46a2a91d0c2c78eaa).

> If the rule’s action frequency is not a summary of alerts, it passes the following variables:

Reviewer 2: In security solution we use all the context variables `{{context.*}}` and `{{state.signals_count}}` for `summary of alerts` as well.

[[rule-action-variables]]
==== Alert notification placeholders

You can use http://mustache.github.io/[mustache syntax] to add variables to notification messages. The action frequency you choose determines the variables you can select from.   

> The following variables can be passed if the rule’s action frequency is a summary of alerts or per alert: 

Reviewer 4: When I first read this, I didn't understand why it was phrased this way (you can do X if Y is true). A rule's action frequency is _always_ either **Summary of alerts** or **For each alert**, because those are the only two options, and so these variables will _always_ be available.

I had to read further to see that some other variables are only available for certain frequency settings, but I still don't think this statement needs to be phrased as a conditional, when the condition will always be true.

```suggestion
The following variables can be passed for all rules: 
```

> NOTE: Refer to {kibana-ref}/rule-action-variables.html#alert-summary-action-variables[Action frequency: Summary of alerts] to learn about additional variables that can be passed if the rule's action frequency is summary of alerts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Refer to {kibana-ref}/rule-action-variables.html#alert-summary-action-variables[Action frequency: Summary of alerts] to learn about additional variables that can be passed if the rule's action frequency is `summary of alerts`. 
```
IMO some kind of visual reminder that "Summary of alerts" is a setting/option/term would be helpful, maybe quotes, maybe capitals, maybe `code`

Author: Good point! I'll bold this since it's referring to the UI option.

```suggestion
NOTE: Refer to {kibana-ref}/rule-action-variables.html#alert-summary-action-variables[Action frequency: Summary of alerts] to learn about additional variables that can be passed if the rule's action frequency is **Summary of alerts**. 
```

* `{{context.rule.query}}`: Rule query (query rules only)
* `{{context.rule.references}}`: Rule references
* `{{context.rule.risk_score}}`: Default rule risk score
+

> NOTE: The `{{context.rule.risk_score}}` placeholder contain the rule's default values even when the *Risk score override* option is used.

Reviewer 4: A bit more readable, and grammatical:
```suggestion
NOTE: This placeholder contains the rule's default values even when the *Risk score override* option is used.
```

* `{{context.rule.rule_id}}`: Generated or user-defined rule ID that can be
used as an identifier across systems
* `{{context.rule.saved_id}}`: Saved search ID
* `{{context.rule.severity}}`: Default rule severity
+

> NOTE: The `{{context.rule.severity}}` placeholder contain the rule's default values even when the *Severity override* option is used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
NOTE: This placeholder contains the rule's default values even when the *Severity override* option is used.
```

* `{{rule.spaceId}}`: Space ID of the rule
* `{{rule.tags}}`: Tags of the rule
* `{{rule.type}}`: Type of rule

> If the rule’s action frequency is not a summary of alerts (per each alert), it passes the following variables:

Author: Re-orged content in [aea23f7](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/3245/commits/aea23f7f1d512b1366ce2ced7fb665d6cc0a9540).

* `{{alert.actionGroup}}`: Action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
* `{{alert.actionGroupName}}`: Human readable name of the action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
* `{{alert.actionSubgroup}}`: Action subgroup of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
* `{{alert.id}}`: ID of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
* `{{alert.flapping}}: A flag on the alert that indicates whether the alert status is changing repeatedly.

> * `{{state.signals_count}}`: Number of alerts detected

Reviewer 2: `{{state.signals_count}}` variable is available in both cases: `summary of alerts` and `for each alert`

* `{{rule.type}}`: Type of rule
* `{{state.signals_count}}`: Number of alerts detected

> The following variables can only be passed if the rule’s action frequency is per alert: 

Reviewer 4: To match the setting name in the UI (debatable whether to cap & bold too, I think it's OK not to):
```suggestion
The following variables can only be passed if the rule’s action frequency is for each alert: 
```

* `{{alert.actionGroup}}`: Action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule

> * `{{alert.actionGroupName}}`: Human readable name of the action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `{{alert.actionGroupName}}`: Human-readable name of the action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
```

* `{{alert.actionSubgroup}}`: Action subgroup of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
* `{{alert.id}}`: ID of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule

> * `{{alert.flapping}}``: A flag on the alert that indicates whether the alert status is changing repeatedly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `{{alert.flapping}}`: A flag on the alert that indicates whether the alert status is changing repeatedly
```

* `{{rule.type}}`: Type of rule

> * `{{state.signals_count}}`: Number of alerts detected

Reviewer 2: It still feels like `{{state.signals_count}}` variable belongs only to `for each alert` case, but it is available and more valuable for `summary of alerts`.

Author: @e40pud would you mind taking a look at the [Alert notification placeholders](https://security-docs_3245.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/security/master/rules-ui-create.html#rule-action-variables) section to see if the intro para correctly conveys which variables are passed for the frequency options?

Reviewer 2: Yes, it looks correct. Though, I think the `{{context}} variables` for summary alerts is not enough.

I think it would be better to tell that all these variables are available for both `summary` and `per alert`:

```
{{context.alerts}}: Array of detected alerts
{{{context.results_link}}}: URL to the alerts in Kibana
{{context.rule.anomaly_threshold}}: Anomaly threshold score above which alerts are generated (machine learning rules only)
{{context.rule.description}}: Rule description
{{context.rule.false_positives}}: Rule false positives
{{context.rule.filters}}: Rule filters (query rules only)
{{context.rule.id}}: Unique rule ID returned after creating the rule
{{context.rule.index}}: Indices rule runs on (query rules only)
{{context.rule.language}}: Rule query language (query rules only)
{{context.rule.machine_learning_job_id}}: ID of associated machine learning job (machine learning rules only)
{{context.rule.max_signals}}: Maximum allowed number of alerts per rule execution
{{context.rule.name}}: Rule name
{{context.rule.query}}: Rule query (query rules only)
{{context.rule.references}}: Rule references
{{context.rule.risk_score}}: Default rule risk score

The {{context.rule.risk_score}} placeholder contain the rule’s default values even when the Risk score override option is used.
{{context.rule.rule_id}}: Generated or user-defined rule ID that can be used as an identifier across systems
{{context.rule.saved_id}}: Saved search ID
{{context.rule.severity}}: Default rule severity

The {{context.rule.severity}} placeholder contain the rule’s default values even when the Severity override option is used.
{{context.rule.threat}}: Rule threat framework
{{context.rule.threshold}}: Rule threshold values (threshold rules only)
{{context.rule.timeline_id}}: Associated Timeline ID
{{context.rule.timeline_title}}: Associated Timeline name
{{context.rule.type}}: Rule type
{{context.rule.version}}: Rule version
{{date}}`: Date the rule scheduled the action
{{kibanaBaseUrl}}: Configured server.publicBaseUrl value, or empty string if not configured
{{rule.id}}: ID of the rule
{{rule.name}}: Name of the rule
{{rule.spaceId}}: Space ID of the rule
{{rule.tags}}: Tags of the rule
{{rule.type}}: Type of rule
{{state.signals_count}}: Number of alerts detected
```

and that the next variables are available only for `per alert`:

```
{{alert.actionGroup}}: Action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
{{alert.actionGroupName}}: Human readable name of the action group of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
{{alert.actionSubgroup}}: Action subgroup of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
{{alert.id}}: ID of the alert that scheduled actions for the rule
{{alert.flapping}}`: A flag on the alert that indicates whether the alert status is changing repeatedly
```

Author: Addressed in [639c5a5](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/3245/commits/639c5a5a2a726cfc0b8338c7ad3f54c76df8a2b9).
